Ants are eusocial insects of the family Formicidae and, along
with the related wasps and bees, belong to the order
Hymenoptera. Ants evolved from vespoid wasp ancestors in the
Cretaceous period. More than 13,800 of an estimated total of
22,000 species have been classified. They are easily identified
by their geniculate (elbowed) antennae and the distinctive node-
like structure that forms their slender waists.
Ants form colonies that range in size from a few dozen predatory
individuals living in small natural cavities to highly organised
colonies that may occupy large territories and consist of millions
of individuals. Larger colonies consist of various castes of sterile,
wingless females, most of which are workers (ergates), as well
as soldiers (dinergates) and other specialised groups. Nearly all
ant colonies also have some fertile males called "drones" and
one or more fertile females called "queens" (gynes). The
colonies are described as superorganisms because the ants
appear to operate as a unified entity, collectively working
together to support the colony.
Ants have colonised almost every landmass on Earth. The only
places lacking indigenous ants are Antarctica and a few remote
or inhospitable islands. Ants thrive in moist tropical ecosystems
and may exceed the combined biomass of wild birds and
mammals. Their success in so many environments has been
attributed to their social organisation and their ability to modify
habitats, tap resources, and defend themselves. Their long co-
evolution with other species has led to mimetic, commensal,
parasitic, and mutualistic relationships.
Ant societies have division of labour, communication between
individuals, and an ability to solve complex problems. These
parallels with human societies have long been an inspiration and
subject of study. Many human cultures make use of ants in
cuisine, medication, and rites. Some species are valued in their
role as biological pest control agents. Their ability to exploit
resources may bring ants into conflict with humans, however, as
they can damage crops and invade buildings. Some species, such
as the red imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta) of South
America, are regarded as invasive species in other parts of the
world, establishing themselves in areas where they have been
introduced accidentally.

The life of an ant starts from an egg; if the egg is fertilised, the
progeny will be female diploid, if not, it will be male haploid. Ants
develop by complete metamorphosis with the larva stages passing
through a pupal stage before emerging as an adult. The larva is
largely immobile and is fed and cared for by workers. Food is
given to the larvae by trophallaxis, a process in which an ant
regurgitates liquid food held in its crop. This is also how adults
share food, stored in the "social stomach". Larvae, especially in the
later stages, may also be provided solid food, such as trophic eggs,
pieces of prey, and seeds brought by workers.[56]
The larvae grow through a series of four or five moults and enter the pupal stage.
The pupa has the appendages free and not fused to the body as in a butterfly pupa.[57]
The differentiation into queens and workers (which are both female),
and different castes of workers, is influenced in some species by the nutrition the larvae obtain.
Genetic influences and the control of gene expression by the developmental 
environment are complex and the determination of caste continues to be a subject of research.[58] Winged
male ants, called drones (termed "aner" in old literature[59]), emerge from pupae along with the usually
winged breeding females. Some species, such as army ants, have wingless queens. Larvae and pupae need
to be kept at fairly constant temperatures to ensure proper development, and so often are moved around
among the various brood chambers within the colony.[60]
A new ergate spends the first few days of its adult life caring for the queen and young. She then graduates
to digging and other nest work, and later to defending the nest and foraging. These changes are sometimes
fairly sudden, and define what are called temporal castes. An explanation for the sequence is suggested by
the high casualties involved in foraging, making it an acceptable risk only for ants who are older and are
likely to die soon of natural causes.[61][62]
Ant colonies can be long-lived. The queens can live for up to 30 years, and workers live from 1 to 3 years.
Males, however, are more transitory, being quite short-lived and surviving for only a few weeks.[63] Ant
queens are estimated to live 100 times as long as solitary insects of a similar size.[64]