Salamanders are a group of amphibians typically characterized by their lizard-like appearance, with slender 
bodies, blunt snouts, short limbs projecting at right angles to the body, and the presence of a tail in both 
larvae and adults. All ten extant salamander families are grouped together under the order Urodela. Salamander 
diversity is highest in eastern North America, especially in the Appalachian Mountains; most species are found 
in the Holarctic realm, with some species present in the Neotropical realm.

Salamanders rarely have more than four toes on their front legs and five on their rear legs, but some species 
have fewer digits and others lack hind limbs. Their permeable skin usually makes them reliant on habitats in or 
near water or other cool, damp places. Some salamander species are fully aquatic throughout their lives, some 
take to the water intermittently, and others are entirely terrestrial as adults. 

An adult salamander generally resembles a small lizard, having a basal tetrapod body form with a cylindrical 
trunk, four limbs, and a long tail. Except in the family Salamandridae, the head, body, and tail have a number 
of vertical depressions in the surface which run from the mid-dorsal region to the ventral area and are known 
as costal grooves. Their function seems to be to help keep the skin moist by channeling water over the surface 
of the body.[5]
Sirens have an eel-like appearance.

Some aquatic species, such as sirens and amphiumas, have reduced or absent hind limbs, giving them an eel-like 
appearance, but in most species, the front and rear limbs are about the same length and project sidewards, 
barely raising the trunk off the ground. The feet are broad with short digits, usually four on the front feet 
and five on the rear. Salamanders do not have claws, and the shape of the foot varies according to the animal's 
habitat. Climbing species have elongated, square-tipped toes, while rock-dwellers have larger feet with short, 
blunt toes. The tree-climbing salamander (Bolitoglossa sp.) has plate-like webbed feet which adhere to smooth 
surfaces by suction, while the rock-climbing Hydromantes species from California have feet with fleshy webs and 
short digits and use their tails as an extra limb. When ascending, the tail props up the rear of the body, 
while one hind foot moves forward and then swings to the other side to provide support as the other hind foot 
advances.[6] 